THE BOTTOM LINE
There is no way to get better at telling stories to people than by telling stories to people. There is no substitute for experience. “You just have to get up and do it,” said Aaron Beverly, who finished second in the Toastmasters world championship of public speaking in 2016. (You can watch his delightful speech here.) He compares storytelling practice to a gym workout. To build muscle, weightlifters have to get their reps in. And if you want to develop your skills as a speaker or storyteller, so do you.

The goal, Mr. Beverly said, is to feel so comfortable in the role that you go on autopilot. You build a sort of muscle memory for your body by standing up in front of a crowd, or on a stage, and speaking out. But you don’t have to do it all on a large stage. You can practice at an open-mic night, at a gathering like The Moth, or even at work by leading a meeting. If nerves are holding you back, start as small as possible. Ask a friend to listen and give you feedback.

Sharing a great story is like giving your audience a gift, because it will stay with them. They can even share it further, the same way that stories have been passed along since the beginning of human life.

WHO IS LISTENING?
Make sure you know who the audience is. Are you talking to friends? Strangers? Colleagues? A large mixed group? Seek out something that connects you. Because you are the one constant, whatever the situation. It’s your story. So to figure out what is right for which group, you need to identify your own relationship to the audience. That might be something as simple as sharing a story of your childhood when facing an audience of children. Or for a completely unfamiliar audience, it could mean finding a story with a universal thread that everyone can relate to.

WHAT STORY SHOULD I TELL?
The most effective and affecting stories spring from something close to you. “The best way to reach all people is to go to a personal story,” said Brenda Wong Aoki, an acclaimed playwright, storyteller and performer. “Everybody is a human being and everybody can relate on that level.”

When you hear a story like this, when you can relate your own experience and understanding to a speaker, it triggers a reaction, a kind of recognition that leads toward empathy. That’s a key factor in figuring out what stories you should tell.

But remember that the relationship between an audience and a storyteller goes two ways. You have to consider who is listening, and your own motivations, to find the right approach. “It’s almost as important to research your audience as it is to find your stories,” Ms. Aoki said.

In her career, Ms. Aoki has worked with storytellers from a variety of traditions, and she emphasizes the importance of focusing on the audience’s needs. “Each story changes in context with whoever you’re telling it to,” she said. “So you have to reach them by knowing where they’re coming from.”

Chris Anderson, who has been the curator of the TED Conference since 2002, agreed. “Look at it from the audience’s point of view,” he said. “What will they take away that’s of value?” And remember the gift metaphor. “If you think of it as your chance to advance an agenda, that’s a recipe for a boring talk,” Mr. Anderson said.

MAKE SURE YOU FIT THE OCCASION
Think about the context in which you’re telling your story. Are you standing onstage in front of unfamiliar people? Or are you at your cousin’s wedding? The last thing you want is to make your audience uncomfortable, so you need to read the room. If you’re unsure whether your story is right for the audience, ask someone who might be there — an organizer or another speaker would do.

One simple way to make sure your subject is appropriate is to focus on something that connects you and the audience. What experiences do you have in common? This is easy enough for a group of colleagues or a family gathering — you have history together, and people and direct connections in common. 

But even if you’re facing an audience of strangers, the occasion of your talk will probably give you some clues. There’s a reason that graduation speakers almost always mention their own school years. At a wedding or a funeral, the focus is clear, but it can be difficult to get just the right tone, so here’s a trick: For a festive event, add a dash of seriousness or sincerity; on a more somber occasion, offer a bit of levity.

Mr. Anderson describes two variant approaches to connecting with an audience of strangers:

Win them over early by making yourself likeable or vulnerable with humor or by sharing something personal.
Stoke their curiosity by posing a question that you will ultimately answer in your talk.
But do not assume the audience knows everything that you do. Avoid jargon and don’t expect everyone will recognize abstract concepts or even the names of people you plan to mention.

“You can’t say everything,” Mr. Anderson cautioned. Keep in mind that there is a point to telling your story: You’re trying to create an experience in the mind of your listeners. Providing that takeaway for your audience is your goal. “Concentrate on that,” Mr. Anderson advised, “and relentlessly delete everything that does not contribute to that narrative.”